Francisco Brady
PUBPOL 750.015
Assignment 3
Introduction:
As we gear up for the 2024 election in the United States, many are dissatisfied with the choices available. This dissatisfaction might stem from wider issues than the candidates themselves, including long-term shifts in the economic landscape, systemic political polarization, and a perceived detachment of political elites from the common electorate's struggles. The Republican nominee, Donald Trump, is a rich businessman who claims to speak for the average American but who passed historic tax cuts for the wealthy during his first term. The Democratic nominee, Joe Biden, is a career politician who has been accused of being out of touch with the average American, in both his economic and social policies. The economic dislocation wrought by the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide, accentuated by staggering job losses and health insecurities, and the rise in authoritarianism in countries like Hungary and India, have contributed to a growing sense of unease about the future of democracy. The dissatisfaction with the political system, and the growing inequality between the rich and the poor, has caused many to question the efficacy of democracy in representing the interests of the average citizen. Political scientists characterize the United States as a majoritarian democracy, where the majority of citizens' preferences are reflected in policy outcomes. However, research, and experience, suggest that the preferences of the wealthy and powerful are more likely to be reflected in policy outcomes than those of the average citizen. Several papers seek to answer the question: Is the United States more responsive to the preferences of the wealthy than to those of the average citizen?
Summaries:
Martin Gilens and Benjamin Page wrote one of the more generative papers in this genre, "Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens." Their seminal work finds that "economic elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no independent influence." They arrive at this conclusion by gathering data on support for 1,779 specific policies in the United States between 1981 and 2002, and comparing differences in support by income groups (50th and 90th income percentiles), along with whether or not those policies were enacted within four years of the survey. When a majority of wealthy citizens and interest groups support a policy, it is enacted about 56% of the time, while when middle-income groups strongly support a policy, probability of its adoption is only around 0.3. They compare this outcome with four theories on the structure of American politics, and conclude that the United States is best characterized as a system of Biased Pluralism, where the preferences of the wealthy and business interests are more likely to be reflected in policy outcomes than those of the average citizen. This paper has been widely cited and has sparked a debate on the role of economic elites in shaping U.S. government policy.

Peter Enns responds with a different perspective on Gilens' data in "Relative Policy Support and Coincidental Representation." Enns introduces the concept of coincidental representation, in which the preferences of the average citizen are aligned with those of the affluent, leading to a higher likelihood of policy adoption. He examines issues with a 10% or greater difference in support between the median and affluent groups and concludes that the relative support of the median and affluent groups is highly correlated, which translates into policy outcomes. This suggests coincidental representation is common, and even if politicians are only reacting to the preferences of the affluent, the middle class may still feel satisfied with policy outcomes. Enns cleverly delves into the dynamic interplay of economic self-interest and policy satisfaction among different income groups, fostering a discussion on the dimensions and stability of this representation. He also looks at differences in partisan support and finds that strong partisanship may play a larger role in policy outcomes than economic self-interest. This paper highlights a potnetial mechanism: the ideological commitments of voters might intersect with or even override economic preferences, potentially complicating simple narratives about material self-interest in policy decisions.

Elssäser, Hense, and Schäfer address the role of political parties in "Not just money: unequal responsiveness in egalitarian democracies," examining the relationship between citizen preferences and policy outcomes in Germany. Using an original dataset, they compare policy support across different socioeconomic groups, and whether policy representation changes across different governing coalitions. They find, as in the United States, that higher incomes equate to more responsive policy influence, even under different government coalitions. However, the German case also finds that regadless of which political parties are in power, policy responds most strongly to upper class preferences. In exploring potential mechanisms, they suggest that descriptive representation, along with income, may play a role in unequal policy responsiveness. The authors argue that while income inequality is a driving factor in policy responsiveness, the composition of political parties and descriptive representation in government can reinforce this effect. The German example adds another layer to consider, especially in terms of how political parties may contribute to affluent influence on policy outcomes, potentially as institutions to direct middle and lower class support towards elite interests.

Schakel and Mathisen take the investigation beyond the borders of the United States, addressing whether similar patterns of policy influence by wealth are present in countries with lower income inequality. Schakel, evaluating the Netherlands, finds that policy responsiveness is more favorable to affluent citizens compared to those in lower or middle-income groups. However, he also considers the link between high-income policy support and the backgrounds of those in government and finds little support. This implies that factors other than descriptive representation within government affects policy responsiveness. Mathisen looks at public preference and policy outcomes in Norway, a country characterized by low inequality and a robust social democracy. His results indicate that even in countries with strong egalitarian norms, policy outcomes can still favor the affluent, although the degree of bias is not as pronounced as in the United States; education appears as a more substantial influence on policy outcomes than income. These findings from Norway and the Netherlands suggest that while income inequality is a significant factor in policy responsiveness, other factors, such as education and commitment to social democratic ideals, may also play a role in shaping policy outcomes.

This group of papers point to a significant influence of economic elites and business interest groups in shaping U.S. government policy, with average citizens having only minimal influence. The consensus indicates that, despite structural differences and varying levels of income inequality, democracies worldwide tend to manifest greater policy responsiveness to wealthier individuals' interests. In many cases, policy preferences among middle-income groups are more closely aligned with those of the affluent, which may explain the lack of a relative backlash against the dominance of elite policy influence.

Discussion:
This group of papers suggests that the United States and other European democracies are more responsive to the preferences of the wealthy than to those of the average citizen. The evidence all points to the importance of income in political change, and to a lesser extent, education. Given these facts, why has there been no backlash from middle and lower-income groups, whose preferences are not as well represented in policy outcomes? Enns' presentation of coincidental representation is a plausible explanation, although I disagree with the characterization. My reading of this evidence is that coincidental representation is misnamed, and more likely a measure of how well the parties function as organized interest groups, marketing their policy positions to the average citizen. To the extent that organized groups can advocate for their own positions and rally voters, this lends itself to the Biased Pluralism theory of American institutional structure, where the interests of business and professional groups intersect with the interests of the wealthy. Elssäser et al's paper on Germany strengthens this argument, suggesting that no matter which political party is in control, the policy results tend to reflect elite preferences.

The United States is also an outlier in political participation more generally. Schakel notes that when accounting for voting status, policy responsiveness increased, however, high income is more important than actually voting when determining policy responsiveness. This suggests that the wealthy have more influence on policy outcomes than the average citizen, even when controlling for political participation. In the American context, closing of polling centers, and other barriers to voting may weaken the association between voting and policy responsiveness even further.

There are some limitations to the evidence presented in these papers, especially in applying the conclusions to the United States context. Income inequality is a significant factor in U.S. political dynamics, and the failure of Gilens' and Page to take this into account may actually serve to understate the influence of the wealthy on policy outcomes. Income inequality in the United States is highly racialized, and Enns' finding of coincidental representation may be augmented to an extent by racialized appeals from political parties to strengthen their coalition. In the Gilens 2012 data, only 11 questions discuss minorities, with 3 specifically mentioning Black Americans. It's possible that this is a limitation of the data, but as with Enns' consideration of the role of partisanship, it may be that to develop any sort of legible theory of policy responsiveness, we need to bring race into the analysis.

Conclusion:
The evidence from these studies suggests that in the United States and many other democracies, policymaking is more responsive to the wealthy and affluent than to average or lower-income citizens. While mediating factors like coincidental representation and the policy marketing efforts of political parties can give the appearance of more balanced responsiveness, the overwhelming trend is towards policies favoring the interests of economic elites and business groups. However, strong social democratic institutions and norms of equality can reduce this policy influence gap. Ultimately, greater campaign finance reform, increased voter participation across income levels, and efforts to address institutionalized racial inequalities may be needed to correct disparities in democratic representation and policy responsiveness.

